And these are local Chinese artists who come on and
perform for you at the base occasionally. And
subsequently, when we got in combat, of course,
the mayor would come out and give us special
honors. On one occasion,
the first fight we had where we repulsed an enemy
attack of 14 bombers, from hitting Kunming. We
turned them around before they ever got to the
city. And of course, the city heard about that. And
they came out the following about two days after.
It was a great party. And the Generalissimo sent
one of his emissaries up and wrapped a, he, each one
of us got a, it was a sort of a red scarf, which mean
something to them in China. I still don't know what
it means, but it's something very dear, and it's a
great honor to get a red scarf, and gave each one of
the pilots one of these. Subsequently, of course,
some of us got medals. The Chinese military, oh,
man, they just, they were particularly Chinese,
what, reminiscent of the Chinese Air Force. They
just loved us. We never...
We flew a few missions toward the latter part of our
tour. Let's say around April or May of 43, the
Chinese manned Russian bombers. There was about
15, 20 old Russian light bombers from the Chinese
crew. And we'd escort them. Many times, we'd have
to navigate them to the target. Otherwise, they'd
never got there. In one case, we did this on Hanoi.
See, that was Japanese occupied. Yeah, I know.
We'll get to that. Now, did Chiang Kai-shek ever,
did he ever come down and talk to you? Did you ever
get a chance to meet him? Chiang Kai-shek visited
Steele one time, and then I say this with hindsight
now.
Chiang Kai-shek was no more than one of the biggest
dictators in China. At the time, of course, he was
in a deadlock fight with Mao Zedong and the
communists. That didn't mean much to me in those
days. I never even thought of such things as that.
To me, he was China. Chiang Kai-shek and Oman were
China. And we had a great deal of respect for them.
And he visited us at the field one day. Of course, we
had to go to Chennault. But I happened to be up
around headquarters in Atlanta. He got out of an
old Goonie Bird. DC-3, but before he stepped out,
at least five or ten so-called Secret Service
people, if you will, in Chinese uniforms, with
pistols drawn out in their hand, pulled out of
their holsters at ready, stepped off the airplane
and then gathered around a circle, and then the
generalissimo got off. He always wore his
uniform. Every time I saw him, he wore his uniform,
and got off.
Of course, I just happened to see him then. I have
never spoken personally to Gisimo. I never did
speak to him personally. I've seen him at
banquets, and I've been maybe 10 or 15 feet from
him, but I've never spoken to him personally or
shook hands with him. Madam, I have. I've talked
with her in conversation. Very charming person.
Tell me, what were your opinions of both of these
people? Well, my opinion of Gisimo was strictly
from... stories I'd heard of him from two or three
times I saw him at a short distance, and from his
pictures. I'm stating my opinion strictly based
on mostly from what I read and understood and
picked up from some people who were authoritative
and some who were not. He definitely was the
biggest, one of the biggest warlords of China. And
of course, marrying a madam, he married money. She
was related to the Soom family. And so with his
power, military power, and authority, and her
money, he was the number one man. From stories I
heard, he was very
capable in dealing with foreigners. over the
bargaining table, a la Len Leith. He was a good
strategist. He was definitely, definitely a
military man. He was much more of a strategist on
the planet than he was a tactician. How good an
administrator he was, I don't know. His wife...
Did Chennault ever say anything about him? These
are some of the stories that I... The reason I say
based on stories I've heard, Chennault had a
fantastic respect for him, but I think The main
reason Chennault had a fantastic respect for him
is because, in effect, he was the Generalissimo's
number one air power advisor. Very close to him.
And vice versa. Seeing the capabilities
Chennault had, the Generalissimo had a great
respect for him. So there was a terrific mutual
respect between the two of them. I'm sure
Chennault thought he was a great man. I don't know
enough about him to say yes or no. He was an
impressive person.
If I would say at a bargaining table, I would say
that the madam could get as much as he could. She was
very charming and very capable and could speak
English well enough. Very good, as a matter of
fact. And she was very influential with President
Roosevelt. So was the Generalissimo. As a matter
of fact, in subsequent head-to-head fights, if
you will, over who was going to control the AVG,
which was eventually coming in the Air Force,
Chenault always had the Generalissimo behind
him, vis-a-vis Hap Arnold. In other words, Hap
Arnold wanted it. Oh, yes. And Chenault wanted it,
too. Hap Arnold and Chenault hated each other's
guts, period. and they fought like cats and dogs.
Of course, as many things are, he was compromised,
and Chenault was given his reserve commission
back in the Air Force and made a Brigadier General
and ultimately a two-star general and three
stars. And of course, when he was given this title,
of course, he was also commander of the newly
established 14th Air Force, which was in China,
per se, and which also took the old emblem of the
Flying Tigers. That's where you always see the
Flying Tigers at the 14th Air Force.
Now, did you ever hear anything about Mao Zedong or
ever have any thoughts about him whatsoever while
you were there? I've thought about that a lot.
since, and knowing as much about it as I do now, and
watching history unfold, I don't ever recall
hearing Mao Zedong. It seems that I do recall bits
of discussion about so-called red Chinese
communists. And I do know that I remember stories
of, you know, there'd be convoys of trucks coming
up the Burmese trail from, Rangoon to Kunming, and
eventually on up to Chongqing. But there were many
stories, and I'm sure this is true, subsequently
I've heard stories that proved to be true, that in
these convoys, as the convoys would get over into
China from Burma across the border, maybe every
third or fourth, maybe have it flat and drop out,
convoy and had to fix it, and then he'd never show
up. He'd turn off and go back up the hills, and that
truck load of arms, maybe if you will, like rifles
and stuff, would eventually trickle into Mount
Titone. And some of this was just pure fraud and
sabotage, if you will, the Chinese getting his
cover shot, in other words, getting his tips,
which is typical of the Far East. I saw that in
Thailand later on, by the way. And so it might have
been Mao, and it might not have been Mao. A lot of
land lease equipment, I am sure, went to Mao
Zedong. I'm sure of that. Or it might have gone to
another warlord? No, it had to be either
Generalissimo or Mao Zedong, one of the two. But
you never really heard much about him, except you
heard about the Red Chinese. OK. So much for Mao.
Let's move to regulations. said before that there
was a club, but it wasn't an officer's club, it
wasn't an enlisted club. What was the
relationship between the men who had been former
sergeants or enlisted men and the ones who had been
former officers? Were they all treated as equal
first-man bases or what? We had two hostels in
Kunming.
The big one in town proper, away from the field, was
really the AVG headquarters, where General
Chernoff lived. There were dormitories there for
officers, well, pilots, if you will, and the
maintenance people, airmen, if you will. They
lived together and had the same aid together. Over
in our hostel at the, where my particular squad,
the first of the pilots were in one hostel, the
maintenance men were in the other. They were all in
the same house. And my hostel, which was right on
the field proper, practically on the field,
adjacent to the field, but the first squadron
hostel, if you will. We had our club. We had our
mess, where the airmen and the officers, polished
so-called, got together. Now, because all of us
were recruited military people, and if you will,
experienced military people, most of us, We had it
ingrained in us a little bit about the aloofness
between officers and airmen. So we didn't mix as
freely as you would think. For instance, getting
an officer in the club, the airmen, 95% of them
mostly, would get over in their corner and have
their drinks in discussion, whereas the pilots
get over in the other corner. Even when you sat down
to eat, it'd be more or less like this. But there was
no specific requirement saying we had to be
separated. We just sort of followed what was
traditional in military units. As time went on,
this characteristic sort of mellowed into one
where we mixed much more freely and had poker games
together. And I've even seen the pilots and the
airmen getting in fights and jugging melees
together. it mattered towards you, particularly
when we got in combat. And did the enlisted men call
the pilots, sir? No, none of that. Matter of fact,
at times I got worried about what would happen with
our discipline, you know. Yeah, I love that. I got
worried about, well, now, are we going to turn into
one of these so-called mercenary outfits where we
just go to hell? I got a little concerned at times.
I'd have discussions with Chenault. I had
personally had discussions with Chenault about
this, and he wasn't worried about it. He
appreciated my interest in it, but he says, I think
you're overworked. I don't think it's a good
thing. When we get in combat, you'll see all these
problems disappear. You won't hear any of this
bitching and crap. And he was so right. He was. Yes,
sir.
A outfit that's not doing anything, that's not
busily engaged, is apt to get into trouble. The old
story you heard, you know, For instance, guys sit
over in the corner and vote and worry about him, but
the guys all around bitch and don't worry about
him. When we were heavily involved in training in
the earlier days at Canggu, we didn't have any
great problems, but there was no comparison when
we got to combat. There was no problem at all. It's
hard for a person to believe that you throw a bunch
of people like this together and see them or hear
about them operating so efficiently and smoothly
as we did in our combat operations when we got
involved in combat. I brought my airplane down
plenty of holes and bullet holes. The next day,
boy, at 7 o'clock when I went out there to get that
airplane, rev up the engine and get it ready, give
it a pre-flight check, those holes were patched.
overnight and done well. So those maintenance men
were really part of the team. That's right, and
they were backed up by these Chinese coolies that
could do the menial and hard labor. But remember
now, we had the elite of the airmen. For instance,
we'd have something wrong with the engine
wouldn't be running right. My maintenance man
would take my carburetor off that engine, and in no
time flat he'd have it completely spread all over
the bench, you know, tear it to pieces. It's
unheard of. And the Red Ground fit me on the States
Air Force. But, you know, no 1st or 2nd National
Line maintenance, all that stuff, you know. He'd
have to take it apart to find what's wrong with it,
put it back together, and make it go ahead and run it
beautifully. It's just an outstanding mechanic.
Right. He was trained. And some things, you know,
born out of necessity, you learn to fix. Now,
admit, some of our parts on the airplane were
probably put together with, let's say, maybe a
brass boat rather than a steel boat, but, you know,
it's held together, that type of thing. But I often
think back, and as a matter of fact, some of my
buddies get together maybe at a reunion, and How in
the hell did we do that? But we did it. I have. So
there's no breakdown in it. No. Discipline
whatsoever. No. Well, no. Really, the answer is
no. You can't think of any? No. Oh, there's some
little instance. Oh, yeah. Matter of fact, Peppy
Boynton, Greg Boynton, Black Sheep Boy. No. Was
he? Pappy was in my squadron. I know him very well.
Oh, really? I'm probably one of the very few guys in
AVG, Flying Tigers, that Pappy Boynton never got
in a fight with. Really? Pappy tried his best at
times to get me in a fight. And it might very well be
that that's the reason I'm living today, because
he was quite a big boy, but not that I was afraid of
him. As a matter of fact, I have. on top of Pappy
Boynton, holding him down in a grump and stupor.
And Pappy and I today are the closest friends.
Where does he live now? I think he's out in
California. I think California. But anyway, tell
me, he was just a pugnacious type? Oh, very
pugnacious. Pappy's biggest, and he admitted it,
was a bottle. Matter of fact, that's where he left
the Marine Corps. He knew he might as well. He was a
terrific man as an individual. a terrific pilot as
an individual. But as a flight leader over there,
he lost several of the airplanes by lack of
navigation or something. He just never did get off
on the right foot in Flying Tigers, and mainly
because he arrived drinking and stayed drinking.
As a matter of fact, he was dishonored and
discharged from the Flying Tigers, you know. And
he left China on a Air Transport, United States Air
Force Air Transport Command B-24 when he wasn't
supposed to, and the pilot that took him out didn't
know it. But Chenault had put out strict orders
when he was drawn back into the Air Force. Under no
conditions will an Air Force aircraft take this
man out of China. He was getting ready for it. This
is not well-known, but it's true. But
subsequently, old Pappy, you know, went back
home, got back in the Marine Corps, and did a, well,
he got the Medal of Honor. Mm-hmm. He's a pretty
combat man, but he's like some of those typical
people. In time of war, you've got to have them, but
in time of peace, what are you doing? A la Patton, a
la some of the other people. Yeah, that's the best
example. But he does want to pick a fight with them.
That's always when he's tight. Sure. But I still
think that he was a good man. He just didn't get
along well over there. He got up on the wrong foot.
But Chenault had the, he could discharge people. I
mean, what, you mean he'd just fire you? Because
you were not in a military unit, per se. Oh, yeah, he
fired them. He just fired you. He didn't discharge
you. Well. How could he give you dishonor? Well,
you see, I'm talking about times after. This was
after the ABG was. Okay, part of the U.S. Army.
Chenault was inducted back into the service
before the ABG was disbanded. Well, yeah, he came
back, he was, Chenault had just got inducted back
into service probably, I'd say in April or May of
1942. Whereas we officially weren't disbanded,
officially disbanded until July the 4th, 1942.
And then- And a lot of us, several of us, that's
another story, several of us stayed over until the
10th of July. Very, very hard aerial combat down
here. We're going to get to that. We want to get back
to the regulations, though. Now, we've talked
about the relationships between the former
officers and the former enlisted men. What about
the uniforms? The only thing we had in the way of
uniforms that resembled military was those parts
of, let's say, our military clothing. that when we
got out of the service, we took with us because we
know we could use. For instance, my flying
coveralls.
I had a blouse that I had a military blouse, the old
what we called pinks in the military at that time,
or the Army, Army Air Corps. It's sort of a gray
slacks with a OD tunic. We called them pinks. Well,
I had those copied in a sort of a gray, summertime
uniform type, if you will, by a Chinese tailor. It
looked just like, but a different color. What I
chose to have as my uniform. Most of us did follow
the
British jungle khaki type. The British jungle
blouse was slacks, and then shorts in the
summertime. I've seen guys in an airplane in
combat wearing straw hats, big cowboy type straw
hats with earphones over them. I've seen them in
t-shirts. We didn't have any particular
uniforms. There were no uniform regulations at
all, per se, no uniform regulations. Did you like
or dislike them? I didn't mind. It didn't bother
me. The only thing that struck me sometimes is a
regulation pertaining, let's say, to discipline
or control of people, like you can or can't do this.
There's very, very few regulations. Oh, you'd see
something on a bulletin board in a bar, for
instance, you can't take drinks after midnight or
something like that outside, something like
that. But there was a minimum of regulation. Now,
of course, we had the regular tech orders for the
airplane. Just like those that are furnished with
any airplane to the Air Force. And maintenance of
the equipment. Standing orders for maintenance,
of course. Right. Now, to log a flight, log a time,
we had a forms one, those types. You just
practically had to keep records. We'd have those.
But like the DASH regulations for personnel, the
DASH series for the district, the DASH series for
the medical supplies, paperwork was a minimum,
absolute minimum. What about as far as an
identification card? Did you have any ID card?
Of
course, each one of us had our ID. passport with a
visa in it. Under your own name. Yeah, under my own
name. Like I was Charles R. Bond Jr. Clerk. It's not
clerk. Yeah, it's clerk. But now, if I remember
correct, yeah, we kept those in possession all the
time. Even when you flew? No, not in combat. But
likely, if we go from, move the unit from China down
to Burma, we'd take that with us in our luggage, you
know, the passport. So you'd have it with you. Or
when we'd go to India to ferry an airplane back,
we'd take that with us. I don't recall, oh, we'd
have, no, matter of fact, to answer your question,
we didn't have any official identification
sites. I don't recall any. But we'd go down, have
the printing office on one side make us like a
business card, Charles Arbonne, ABG, then on the
other side put Chinese letters, you know, Charles
Arbonne.
What about if you were shot down? And the Japanese
got a hold of you. Then what? Again, it was just
name, purpose on the unit. Is that what Chennault
told you? No. Now, when it comes to that type of
thing, to the extent we had been trained for this,
Chennault didn't figure he had to harp much on
this. That's still typical. We were military
outfit when it comes to that. But now we did wear
the... I got a trunk out in the garage. You don't
need to see all this stuff. You've seen pictures of
it. We wore it on the back of our jacket. In effect,
it was printed in Chinese. It had a Chinese flag on
it. It printed on a Chinese flag, in effect. And in
effect, it said in Chinese, this is an American
volunteer fighting for the Chinese. Give him all
assistance if you possibly can. That's on the back
of the jacket. Yeah, that was on there. We'd sew
that on the back of the jacket. But incidentally,
the two times I was shot down, I didn't have
equipment. I didn't have my jacket on. And what
would you fly in? No, I know, but what uniform? What
would you usually wear yourself?
Whenever I'd fly, I'd always wear my flying suit.
And eventually, when that got so bad, like I say,
these 250 calibers, sticking out in your cockpit.
You know, you had to keep them all. And
particularly when you're firing them, you know,
they've got a pattern. The oil would drop out. It
dropped right at your feet when your rudder's
pedaled and your flying coveralls. Flying
coveralls always from knee down would just pull
them all continually. I'd have to watch them every
day, you know. But eventually, they just wore out.
Then we did have, finally got in supply, It seemed
like the only supplies we got, clothing, was
always Navy. I don't remember any Air Force stuff
ever coming up. But we began to, towards the end,
you know, when we proved our value as a fighting
outfit, and Lend-Lease began to take effect, we
did get some or another, most of it was Navy
supplies. I got the Navy flying jacket, terrific
one, that fur collar. Then I wore a Navy flying suit
all the time. I had an old Air Force helmet when I was
shot down the first time. I always wore a helmet, of
course, and an oxygen mask. And gloves, half the
time I'd wear my gloves. The time I got shot down, I
didn't have them on, big and stuff.
Boots, I had the calf-length boots that I wore all
the time. I had them made in India. No, I had them
made in Burma before I went up to China. OK. Now,
let's talk now for a minute about Chanel. What kind
of person was he?
Well, the first thing that impresses you about
Chenault is the appearance of his face when you see
him. He's got that, in the typical picture you see
him, he's got that jutted lower jaw stuck out,
which indicates, you know, a determined, dogged
individual. He's that way. that he is determined.
He's very hard of hearing. Even back in 30, back in
41 when I first met him, he was very hard of hearing.
And to my knowledge, I never saw him wearing
hearing aids.
He is, he talks softly. He's got a good sense of
humor.
He's got a wit about him. He can needle you. He is a
tactician superb on flying airplanes. He's much
more, in my opinion, a tactician than he is a
strategist. What do you mean? Tactical, in other
words, like a fighter squadron. But planning a war
campaign, that I don't think was his sport. Now, he
learned it rapidly in planning campaigns in China
because he had to. He was the Air Force. And he did
well, but of course he had the backing of
Generalissimo and all of his Chinese veteran been
in the Army all their lives and knew the country and
all.
General Chenault didn't have a complete Air
Force. He didn't have a bomber force. He just had
fighters and some training aircraft. He knew how
to organize and get a unit going. Did he win the
respect of his men? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Matter of
fact, all of us loved him. Well, it was lovely.
There was no dissension? Oh, yes. There was a few.
There's always a few, you know. I've heard Greg
Boyden get mad at him. I actually got mad at you, old
man. When I was down in Burma, you know, with Bob
Neal. Bob Neal was the squadron commander and I was
his assistant. I always refer to Bob Neal and I
because eventually, if you will, he was a group
commander and I was a group assistant. I was a group
operations officer, if you will. practically the
whole outfit. But when we were down in Burma,
remote from him up in China, we were on our last
bottle of oxygen, and there was no effort to get us
any more. Well, what the hell's the old man
thinking about? We can't fly like this. Well, I
guess everybody makes comments about their boss.
He probably knew the situation, but just had no
oxygen to get us. I don't ever remember the old man
making a a decision that I was absolutely against.
He personally ordered me to take some flights,
which I did, and I should have. A couple of them I
couldn't perform, and I had to return because of
weather. I had to relieve another outfit. It was
battle ridden, and I couldn't. But he knew as well
as I did that when I returned, I brought the other
eight airplanes back with me. He was
disappointed, and I knew it, but he never held it
against me. He'd been the first to congratulate me
when I returned from shooting an airplane down. He
always seemed to show up at critical times when his
presence was felt as a morale booster. He could
talk to you where you could understand him. I've
seen him stand up, you know, when morale was
getting a little low. For instance, we up at
Kunming, sitting there not in fights, you know,
for a while, early part of 42, and the third squad
down in Rangoon was fighting every day, you know.
Not just because of the $500 an airplane never
getting shot when they shoot them down, but we just
weren't in combat, and damn it, we wanted to go down
there. Well, he had to explain why he couldn't
rotate us as quick and as often as we wanted to,
because... And he'd get up, and some of the men were
disgruntled, apologizing. He would stand up and
talk to them just like I'm talking to you, not as a
commander talking to his men, but not as a general
talking to a private, but as a man talking to a man.
And he had savvy feelings. He could explain things
away. A motivator.
But he wouldn't, I don't think he would inspire me.
He would, I would do what he wanted me to do, and did.
I respect him, but for instance, I didn't have
almost the reverence for him like I had for LeMay. I
knew LeMay was, I just knew he was a great man going
to be. Chenault, he's my boss. I trust him, and I'll
fight for him. He's that different. But you had
confidence in this man and you trusted him? Oh,
yeah, definitely. When he told you something,
that was the way it was? I mean, he was an honest
person? Oh, absolutely. And he had his troubles at
his level, you know, for instance, retaining his
command. Even before he was inducted back in
service, they had two or three... Air Force
Brigadier General in India in the 10th Air Force.
Fighter-type commanders, you know, were just
dying and pulling every string they could back to
half-Arnold to come over and take over that Flying
Tiger Group. And the old man always had to go to the
Generalissimo, the old man Chennault, and of
course stop anything like that. No, he was a
General Chennault, in my opinion, But what that
man did, not only for the United States and for
China, but for the world at that time, he deserves,
in my opinion, to be one of the great men of history.
I don't think he's ever gotten full credit for what
he did. No, he didn't. But looking back now, if you
recall, well, you don't recall because you
weren't born then, but this was in 41 and 42. The
darkest, well, Pearl Harbor Day in a few weeks and
months, right after Pearl Harbor Day, December 7,
1941. Boy, there were some dark days in this
country. Oh, I studied it. Oh, well, and you
studied it. Okay. But, I mean, if you'd lived it.
Yeah. See, I've talked to her wife and my mother and
father and them, you know. And, boy, this country
was, they were worried, scared. And the only
bright spot, across the entire worldwide
horizon, not only in Japan, but in Europe. Nobody
would win in Europe in war. We hadn't even gotten
into it. Was the American Volunteer Group going to
combat and shoot down 24 airplanes, about losing
one. Eight airplanes against 60. I've been in
combat with 14 of us against probably 125. be shot
down. Well, we're going to get to that. But to
answer your question,
he did something for the country in the darkest
days that helped us over the bumpy spots. And a
lot of his criticism comes from petty jealousy, in
my opinion, by his professional rivals. You
follow me? Sure.
I wanted to ask you, what about his leadership
capability? Well, I think I expressed that he was,
no doubt, he was a leader. Now, he didn't fly with
us. No. See, in the earlier days when he was in
China, he actually flew an airplane and actually
fought some of the Japs. I'm told this. I don't know
this for a fact, but I'm sure I believe it. But with
us, that was not his job. He didn't fly with us. He
had his own little troop. his own little personal
airplane, if you will call it, a little transport,
that he picked, by the way, one of the Navy pilots,
picked one of him, the Navy pilots out, to fly it for
him. And he, if there was a problem at some
particular base because of supply or something
that was a difficult problem, lack of supply or
organization, something communicated broke
down, he'd show up. He'd show up at critical times.
When we were starting a new campaign, let's say
when we were moving a unit, like we moved from one
base to another and sort of move in late at night
with the idea of the next day catching a raid that
came up habitually every day at, say, 10 o'clock in
the morning, a la training purpose for the
Japanese Air Force out of Hanoi against
Kuilin. He'd come there and be on hand. Whenever he
was at our base, we knew something was going to
happen. He was that dynamic. Yet, I say that
dynamic. Yet, I would never call him a dynamic
person. Why not? Well, you think of a dynamic
person as somebody entering the room, and he just
bursts in and takes over. And boy, you know he's
there. If you'd not have come into the room, you'd
see him. He'd start telling you what he was there
for, and sort of on a controlled basis, he'd take
over and things would proceed without any great
hullabaloo and so forth. He was much more mild
mannered. More mild mannered? Yes, more mild
mannered. But I've seen him mad where he cussed
like Patton does, supposedly did.
Now, let's get to your, what exactly was your
title, and exactly what was your job during these
combat missions, during 1942? During 1942? Well,
I was a wingman. I was inducted as a wingman in the
American Voluntary Group, and I eventually was
supported. I was appointed to a flight leader,
probably the early part of to a flight leader as a
result of the December 18th air battle, the first
one we had. Then I was a flight leader, and I turned
out to be, you might say, the operations officer,
if you will, for our first pursuit squadron, and
Bob Neal was squadron commander's right-hand man
after Sandell, the original squadron commander,
was killed. Okay, and how many in the squadron?
I'd have to refer to my records for the exact
number. We originally planned to have 25
airplanes, 25 pilots. I dare say in the first
quarter we never had more than about 16
or 17 pilots and probably 15 or 16 airplanes total
at any one time. And so when you'd go on a mission,
would you take... Half of that. Normally, most of
our emergency were air defense nature, taking off
from alert. Sometimes we'd have an air cap flying
around, being prepared in the air for
interception of the enemy, expecting to come
over. But normally we'd operate and always take
off in pairs, never by ourselves. At least two
airplanes.
Well, for instance, it depends on the situation.
At Rangoon, we had cross runways, and we had four
airplanes dispersed at the end of each of the two
crossing runways, a total of eight. At other
places, we had only two airplanes on alert, which
is common practice, ground alert, and both of them
would take off together. Whenever we planned a
mission, like we planned the attack on Chiang Mai
Air Base in Thailand in March 1942, we planned that
with 12
airplanes. The most airplanes that have ever been
in combat together on our side, the most airplanes
that the flying Tigers ever put up in one fight was
14.
at one time in Kunming, and I think we dispersed a
flight of bombers at that time. Most of the
nine-tenths of my fighting, 85% of it, was done in
Rangoon, where normally we'd put up anywhere
from, every plane we could get up there, we'd have
ready, you know, to get in a fight. But we knew, I
fought as many as four times a day, beat the enemy
actually four times one day. Normally we'd have
about eight to twelve, and maybe there'd be four
RAF
boosters or hurricanes that had come to evacuate
out of Singapore. Normally we'd have eight to
twelve. We had twelve up, that was good. Many times
we've taken over two airplanes. But I'd see as many
as 120, 125, 130 Japanese fighters come over
against us, and we'd have eight airplanes there.
Now, how long did you stay out of Kunming? Well,
right after Pearl Harbor Day, two of the squadrons
went up to Kunming. On the 14th of December, one
went to Rangoon. We continued to stay in that
posture. Rotating every now and about once every
month or 35 days, changing the squadron at Rangoon
back up to Kunming and replacing it with one of the
old squadrons down there. So we kept one fourth,
one third of the outfit at Rangoon until the
British forced us out the last day or two of
February 1942. And that happened to be our
squadron. And then they took over. And they took
over. And then you went back up to... And we
gradually... We pulled out and flew... Then
where'd you go? We flew north to... Do
you
know what the name of it is? Well, last year. We flew
to a base in northern Burma. It's
on the Irrawaddy River. I can't think of it. But we
just retreated, if you will. OK, so in March? The
first few days, well, the last day, I think it's
28th of February. OK, 28th of February. We
evacuated Rangoon. You left Kunming and Rangoon.
No, no, we stayed Kunming. See, Kunming is our base
in China. OK, so you all stayed there. We all stayed
there. But we pulled out of the forward base in the
south at Rangoon because the Japanese forced us
out. And, of course, the British pulled out too. In
fact, the reason we pulled out is because the
British pulled a radar out that night. Then you
went where? Northern Burma. Then we evacuated to
northwestern Burma, just west of Lascio. And we
continued to do air alert there for about, we kept,
about four to eight airplanes down there with the
RAF and helping them still defend at least
northern part of Burma for about a month. Then we
pulled out of there back further north and last
you'll see the Japanese begin to penetrate
further north into Burma and eventually we pulled
everything across into
Low Wing China, which is just across the river into
southern Yunnan province of China. Pulled
completely out of Burma because the Japanese were
then approaching the southern border of China.
And we continued to operate out of Low Wing, which
was really our main supply base in the southern
part of China,
Burma Road had been built that far north at that
time, and we had a supply base there. And then we
operated out of Lower Wing and Kunming against the
Japanese in the Burma area for quite a while. And
later on, we moved toward the Kunming outskirts up
to Chungking, then subsequently from Chungking
to Guilin, depending on where the operations were
the most critical. But see, we had to defend the
Burma Road approaches. Then when the Japanese
took over Burma, they tried to build a Lido Road
across the hump from India into China, and they did
build a road. I think it got mules across it. We had
to defend that. Then we had to defend the hump
route, fly air transport command. The Japanese
would come up there and shoot airplanes down. So we
had to defend that part a little. And then as the
Japanese started moving further into the central
part of China from the Hankow area, coming down
towards Guilin, we had to move airplanes up in that
area. So we began to move all over southern China.
It depended on where we were needed. And once or
twice, like this famous raid on Chiang Mai,
Thailand, we planned a raid down through the
northern part of Burma, or the eastern part of
Burma, to hit the Japanese Air Force in Thailand.
That's another story on its own. Okay, why don't we
start in right now then with the missions. And of
course, your first one was the 14th of December,
1941. 18. I thought you said 14. Oh, no, 14. We
moved. You moved to come in, and the 18th was the
number one mission. Yeah, the 18th.